Alexandre Dumas, the author of iconic novels The Three Musketeers and The Count of
Monte Cristo, was one of the most influential authors not only in the genre of historical novels,
but in adventure novels as a whole. His breathtaking stories featuring real historical locations and
events bring the narratives to life and bind the readers to lovable characters, as they witness the
marvelous battles for fortune, honor, and glory unfold. Throughout the years, Dumas’ novels
have been translated from French to hundreds of different languages and transcribed into
countless films, cartoons, and even TV shows—aimed both at children and adults. It is without a
doubt that Dumas established himself as a staple of the adventure genre. However, there are
many indications that Dumas did not achieve this feat alone. In fact, it is widely accepted that
Dumas had help from another author—a ghost writer by the name of Auguste Maquet—who was
erased from history and never given credit for any of Dumas’ works (Paris). The degree of
influence of Maquet on Dumas’ literature is still heavily debated today, with claims that Maquet,
though a learned scholar, lacked the talent required to exemplify the level of literary prowess
possessed by Dumas. Though it is impossible to quantify the extent of Maquet’s contribution to
Dumas’ beloved style of writing, this detail is completely irrelevant, as Maquet’s role was much
more valuable than that of a simple writing assistant. Maquet was the cornerstone to Dumas’
success—not only introducing him to the historic novel genre, but also providing him with the
required historic background and inspiration to create his famous narratives.

Alexandre Dumas was born in 1802 in Vlillers-Cotterêts, a city in northern France.
Dumas’ father, Thomas-Alexandre, was famous as the first ever black general in the Napoleon
army (Alexandre). His glory, however, did not last, as he was later imprisoned and found dead
shortly after his release. His father’s role in the army, as well as his imprisonment played an
important role on Dumas’ writing later in life. Though Dumas is most well-known for his
historical Novels (most notably The Three Musketeers) Alexandre Dumas began his writing
career as a playwriter (Alexandre). In 1822, Dumas decided to move to Paris in order to
“immerse himself in literature” (Alexandre). With dramas such as Henri III et sa cour and
Anthony, Dumas earned his name as a successful writer—up to the point of being compared to
the great Victor Hugo. Dumas continued his playwriting career: publishing various comedies and
dramas. When Dumas was already famous in the literary circles of France, Auguste Maquet was
only just a boy. Born in Paris in 1813, Maquet studied history at the Lycée Charlemagne, where
he became assistant professor in 1831(Martin). In 1835, Maquet left the school in pursuit of
literature, stating simply “Je vais demander à la littérature ce que l'Université me refuse: gloire et
profit”: I am going to demand from literature what the university refuses me: glory and profit
(Paul). Maquet wrote several small dramas, yet they gained no real popularity or traction. Until,
in 1837, Maquet’s newly written drama, Soir de carnaval, was relayed by his good friend Gérard
de Nerva to the already famous Alexandre Dumas. In 1839, Bathilde, a slightly rewritten version
of Maquet’s play, was published under the name Alexandre Dumas. It is here where the iconic
collaboration of the two writers began.

Now that we have gained a grasp on the backgrounds of the two authors, we can begin to
evaluate their respective contributions to some of their published works. Throughout this paper,
we will be focusing on just two of the many works published by Dumas in collaboration with
Maquet: The Count of Monte Cristo and The Three Musketeers. Before we begin our analysis, it
is important to direct our attention do Dumas’ first published historic novel: The Conspirators.
Published in 1841, right after the arrival of Maquet, the novel became a great success. But isn’t it
suspicious that Dumas’ first historic novel was published right after the beginning of his
collaboration with a historian? It is difficult to explain the drastic switch Dumas had undergone
in such a short period of time—form a drama playwriter to an adventure novelist—unless
Maquet played a major role in introducing him in to the genre. It is still a wonder how Maquet
had such a strong influence on Dumas; he couldn’t inspire confidence using his status or name,
as he was relatively unknown at the time. This leaves only his incredible knowledge of history
that he must have used to inspire Dumas, by providing him with interesting historic plot points
and characters. Though all evidence points in that direction, it is impossible to prove that it was
Maquet who encouraged Dumas to write historic novels; however, it is easy to show that even if
Dumas decided to do so on his own, Maquet provided great help that made the novels possible.
In The Three Musketeers, the story is set in the early 17th century in France during the reign of
King Louis XIII. With some historical research, it becomes obvious that Dumas could never
have written something with such historic accuracy without outside help. Though it is possible,
and even likely, that Dumas knew about the life of Louis XIII, the political situation of Anne of
Austria, and the assassination of the Duke of Buckingham, it is highly unlikely that he had a
solid enough grasp of their respective stories to write a novel on that topic. Furthermore, the
novel features many allusions to minor historic characters, such as of Charles de BatzCastelmore of Gascony and comte de Troisville, who would be most likely unknown to someone
who hasn’t studied history.

In The Count of Monte Cristo, there are also many details which arise suspicion regarding
Dumas’ possession of such thorough knowledge of history. In this novel, this is visible to an
even greater extent. In fact, a major chunk of the plot in the novel relies on intricacies of certain
historical events, such as Napoleon’s reign, exile to Elba, return to Paris, and defeat at waterloo.
The imprisonment and tragedy faced by the protagonist, the young Edmund Dantes, is fueled by
the immense political confusion of the time. One year, people who were against Napoleon were
considered enemies. The next, his supporters were named traitors. And after Napoleon’s return to
Paris, Bonapartistes were hailed as the heroes once again. Edmund was caught in the middle of
this chaos and imprisoned in very harsh conditions: even though his actions would be considered
heroic several years later. A major part of Edmund’s vengeance arc is driven by the failure to
free him from his prison even after Napoleon’s return. The elegancy in which Edmund’s
character is developed though historic events could not, with all likelihood, be attributed to
Dumas alone, and is most likely Maquet’s work. Furthermore, unlike The Three Musketeers, a
major part of the novel is set not only in France, which Dumas was likely familiar with, but in its
surroundings, including Italy and small islands in the Mediterranean Sea. The detailed
descriptions of iconic locations such as the horrible prison of Château d'If, the mysterious
deserted island Monte Cristo, and the ancient city of Rome, play a major role in the charm of the
story. Once again, it is almost certain that Dumas didn’t write this alone, as he likely hadn’t even
heard of some of these locations, and even if he did, he could not possibly have been able to
accurately describe them and integrate them into the novel in such a graceful way.

The more we delve into the individual novels, the more we understand that the major part
of the narratives—seamless integration of historic people and events into fictitious stories—
simply could not possibly be achieved without thorough knowledge of history, which Dumas
lacked and Maquet possessed. However, Maquet’s contribution did not stop there, as he also had
a tremendous influence on the made-up narratives of the novels. From the very beginning of his
career in the world of literature, Maquet wanted to gain two things: glory and profit (Martin).
The latter Maquet received almost immediately, as he was generously rewarded as a
compensation for his name being omitted from all published novels. However, he could never
gain glory. Tired of hiding under Dumas’ shadow, Maquet even went to court against him, but
all he received was more money (Paris). Since Maquet failed to popularize his name using
conventional methods, he attempted to do so in the only way he could—by modifying the
narratives he wrote with Dumas and turning them into allegories of himself. This is evident in
the immense symbolic parallelism between his life and the novels. In both The Three Musketeers
and The Count of Monte Cristo, the narrative explores the interaction between an inexperienced
young man and a wise person, as the readers witness how the student slowly becomes the master.
In The Three Musketeers, it is the hot-headed D'Artagnan and the three experienced musketeers,
and in The Count of Monte Cristo, the old man Abbé Faria, who turns Edmund from a forlorn
boy destined to rot in prison to a strong-willed man who will go to any lengths to achieve his
goals. This is an obvious parallel to the young, yet talented, Auguste Maquet, who arrives at the
doorstep of the famous writer Alexandre Dumas. As the years pass by, he learns from Dumas,
and his talent is converted to raw literary skill and passion. This parallel is almost a call for the
older Dumas to fade away and let Maquet ascend in status: from the unknown student to the
famous master. Another, even stronger, parallel hides in the book title of The Three Musketeers.
Without having read the novel, it would be safe to assume from the title that the story focuses on
the adventures of three Musketeers of the Guard. However, that is not entirely the case, as the
protagonist of the story, D'Artagnan, isn’t even part of the three musketeers, but rather a young
18-year-old boy who later joins them in their adventures. This detail is also an obvious parallel to
Dumas’ neglect to include Maquet as a collaborator in his novels: just as D’Artagnan is excluded
from the title of the book, Maquet is stripped from his rightful position as the author. Thus,
perhaps in desperation or even in spite, Maquet managed to bend and twist the narratives to
demonstrates the injustice he had suffered, and subtly call out Dumas along with the unfair
system that kept him away from glory. It can therefore be seen that Maquet had a great
contribution not only in providing historical backgrounds, but in creating the narratives
themselves.

150 years after Dumas’ death, hundreds of biographies have been published about the
magnificent author that singlehandedly changed the genre of adventure novels—the author that
shook the world with his brilliant historic-oriented pieces. Auguste Maquet, on the other hand,
lacks even a single comprehensive biography in English: only being featured in small online
articles and mentioned a few more times in Dumas’ biographies as his little helper. However, as
we have found in the paper, Maquet was far from just a simple assistant, but the key to Dumas’
enormous success. Without Maquet, it is more than likely that Dumas would have stayed a
simple playwriter, who would be popular for a time, but then forgotten one hundred years later.
Maquet managed to convince Dumas to make the switch to become a novelist and guided him
throughout the entire transition: providing him with not only historical background for each
piece, but also writing a sizeable chunk of the characters and the plot. All Dumas had to do was
put the fully fleshed out narrative on paper using his unforgettable style of writing. The more and
more we delve into the facts about the contribution of the two authors, the more it becomes
obvious that it was Dumas who was the assistant, and Maquet the brilliant author.